ABSTRACT

Browser domains are mixed use, e.g. the same domain may be used for work or for an impromptu detour: hostname and elapsed time are poor proxies for task alignment. DriftSense is an exploration of browser task drift, which is the deviation from a task stated at the beginning of the session as reported by the participants, using privacy minimised local sensing and a tangible reflective interface. Phase 1 had 19 participants that provided 665 task sessions with structured context, content-free activity summaries and post-session alignment reports. The compact logistic model showed good retrospective discrimination using a chronological known participant holdout (ROC–AUC = .938, F1 = .870). During Phase 2 the frozen model analyzed 5-minutes and 10-minutes time windows for sessions up to 20 minutes and more than 20 minutes respectively. If the score was over the threshold, it would trigger an ESP32 device (which was not blocking) that had a countdown timer, a short beep and three buttons. High usability, privacy comfort, perceived usefulness, and low annoyance were found based on interviews with 12 participants and mistimed cues were identified. The accuracy of the early window and causal behavior effects are left to the controlled evaluation.


INTRODUCTION

A website can have diametrically opposed objectives. A tutorial can appear on a video platform, a project discussion can be found on a social platform, and a search result can be crucial background information or the start of an impromptu detour. This ambiguity is overlooked when considering a domain as useful or distracting in itself. A potential downside of fixed timers is that they provide information on how long a session was, but not if it met the purpose for which the session was started. DriftSense is based on a different concept. The task is declared by the participant, the browser signals are light weight and describe the session, and participant's self-report after the session is used to define drift.

Blocking, time limits, reminders, monitoring or restricting the interface of the website on a digital device are all common self-control tools. Reviews cautioned that screen time alone was not an appropriate measure to describe meaningful use or respect of an intervention's use for a user's goal. Purpose Mode keeps you engaged while minimizing certain distracting elements; one sec is a brief pause before entering the app; and StayFocused poses thought-provoking questions when exiting focus session attempts. These push the "optional" cues that are noticeable in the first place, instead of blocking.

Browser task drift is when a participant indicates that their browser activity deviated from the process-oriented task that was specified at the beginning of the session. This is not paid attention to, productivity or clinical condition. Switching from an approved task site is not necessarily drift as a task may need supporting material elsewhere. Likewise, scrolling, idling, typing or video watching can be relevant or irrelevant to the task. Activity signal are therefore interpreted by DriftSense as a predictive evidence and retain the answer provided by the participant.

The study consisted of two stages. Phase 1: Data collection and model development was carried out by 19 participants yielding 665 sessions of which 634 had explicit binary alignments. The frozen local model was the primary interactive product phase in Phase 2, where it was used to test subsequent windows of activity and once that score was met, accessed a physical ESP32 interface. The interface featured a 16x2 alphanumeric screen, an audio alert and three physical buttons to set up the session, complete it, and reflect on it. At the end of the study, 12 participants took part in a semi-structured interview about both phases.

In the paper there are 6 terms used consistently. Task session is a session the participant explicitly began for a declared task - it is not created by opening of a site. A planned work task site is called a participant-approved task site and is a hostname that is selected but not a productive site. Task drift is an explicit post session report that activity drifted away from the stated task. An activity signal (such as clicks, duration or state) that does not contain any page text or typed characters. A rolling window is the five or ten-minute time period (whichever is applicable for the specific measurement) that was immediately previous to the checkpoint when the measurement was taken. The tangible reflective interface is the actual LCD, buzzer and buttons that reflect the state of the session and allow the participant to respond independently to the browser.

There are three questions in this paper:

1. How can a browser system signal the alignment of tasks with respect to different participants, while making as few assumptions as possible in order to preserve the user's privacy, and without relying on ground truth information such as time, or hostnames?

2.  Is the Phase 1 model able to discriminate late task drift in the completed sessions as reported by the participants on a chronological holdout?

3. What were the descriptions of participants on the tangible interface's usability, privacy, timing, usefulness, interruption and annoyance in Phase 2?

The contribution is not some generic activity tracker, but a full fledged HCI system. It consists of a task-drift construct based on the participants, a local sensing and labelling workflow, a compact model and a duration-dependent rolling policy, a tangible reflective interface and empirically gained session records and post-study interviews. A summary of the relationship between the two phases and the different evidence they provided are included in Figure 1.

RELATED WORK

Digital Self Control and Utility Preservation

Digital self-control tools range from dashboards, timers, app limits, blocking, reminders to interface changes. Recent reviews report mixed evidence in the few short, diverse studies, and recommend designs that do not focus solely on reducing screen-time. Digital wellbeing is not about not using technology, but about some balance between the good and bad of technology. Less use can be a sign of successful self-regulation or unfinished work; more use can be a sign of drift or essential work.

The user agency can also be determined by interface design. In some instances, controlled studies of social-media interfaces demonstrate that restricting that same behavior can be beneficial and at other times, it can create friction. Purpose Mode allows users to hide feeds, limit continuous content or make a simpler layout. Previous studies also showed that the attitude towards the use of smartphones is not only influenced by the duration of use, but also by the purpose of use and the level of autonomy. The reason DriftSense doesn't deem an entire site as undesirable or block access when a cue appears.

Warm-up with intention, friction and reflection exercises.

Interventions can interrupt automatic action without a prohibition: one sec couples a short delay with an explicit choice prior to entry into a selected application. MindPhone asks what you're trying to do when you unlock your phone; StayFocused asks you some reflective questions when you exit a focus-session; and InteractOut introduces weak resistance to common gestures. A comprehensive literature review on goal-oriented HCI interventions also reveals that the representation and support of a goal makes a difference to behaviour change.

PauseNow conceptualises digital wellbeing as more than just limiting screen-time, it's about intention and behaviour. WellScreen allows for comparison of expected use with observed use to facilitate reflection. There is also a requirement for intention and activity in regrets. Thus, DriftSense requests a task prior to use and requests alignment afterwards, and its cue is an invitation for reconsideration but not an attempt to know the participant's internal state.

Recent systems consider richer semantic inputs to infer mental states, or look at regretted use. These can be used to aid in detailed interpretation, but more sensitive content than DriftSense currently has is required. In contrast, DriftSense only considers structured task context and aggregation of content-less activities.

Physical and audible communication.

Tangible user interface makes digital state tangible, visible and manipulative. Recent reviews have praised tangible systems as being particularly effective when controls have to be visible, direct and kept off a busy screen, and have also emphasized the importance of user-testing prior to making any strong claims of outcome. Outside of the visual foreground sound can also be noticed, but it may interfere or be socially disruptive to some. When looking at notification muting in particular, research indicates that it does not guarantee that the behavior of checking will decrease or wellbeing will increase. DriftSense consequently leverages a brief, transient beep, in conjunction with a display and physical controls, and the interviews specifically assess interruption and annoyance.

This section covers the behavioral sensing, personal context, and privacy aspects.

While behavioral sensing can be used to provide timely assistance, there is a greater disclosure risk with richer sensing. Digital-wellbeing scholarship thus requires a focus on agency, context and consequences of measurement. Research also indicates that wellbeing practices and constraints are not device specific. So DriftSense claims to have a known-participant holdout, but no claim of unseen-user performance.

Instead of reproducing page meaning, DriftSense requires minimal inputs. It captures structured task type, timing, number of interactions (without values), focus state, idle and active time, total away time (without interaction identity) and accessible video-playback state. It doesn't have the page text/title, URL path/query, messages, screenshots, key values or identity of outside-set locations. This keeps beneficial session data and decreases publicity of what the participant viewed or typed.

RESEARCH GAP

Pre-access friction, reflective prompts, intention questions, or post-use awareness are provided in existing systems to modify the interface. DriftSense connects these elements at the level of the browser-session: the participant initiates a task, content-free activity is summarized locally, post-session answer provides the label, model acts on 5- or 10-minute time windows, and physical device provides a brief cue out of the browser. Table 1 is a comparison of the closest systems.

This is the DRIFTSENSE CONCEPT AND DESIGN page.

Drift as a participatory generated construct.

DriftSense is a separation between context, predictors and outcomes. The structured type of task and the hostname is approved by the participant. Predictors are given by the aggregate activity. The binary outcome is only provided by the explicitly post-session alignment response. Thus, this separation avoids a frequent category mistake that is made when a behavior trace is taken as evidence of the meaning of the behavior.

When the task starts a participant selects one of six types of structured tasks: writing or creating a task, coding or problem solving task, reading or research task, learning or tutorial task, communication or coordination task, or another planned task. The participant also chooses an amount of time they are aiming for. The duration sets up a session and rolling schedule and does not terminate the task or mark the result of the task as a label. The task can also be carried out at a series of approved locations and the temporary activity away from the approved location is the sum of the time spent and not a report of where the activity was performed.

Driving the real session boundary, DriftSense asks the question: Was the session on track with the task started by the participant? A response of 0 is coded for an explicit aligned response and a response of 1 is coded for an explicit moved-away response. Unlabeled responses are either a "not sure" answer, or "no answer" or "no action and no answer". The construct is not replaced with the following actions: continue, save, dismiss, stop, and reminder.

DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

The implementation was guided by six criteria:

1.  Explicit initiation. Hostname opening does not imply a task, the participant must: Start the session, and declare a structured task type.

2.  Participant-defined alignment. The inputs or baselines are time and site and never ground-truth labels.

3.  Content minimization. The system only counts, times and states, but does not gather page contents or key values.

4.  Local operation. Session records, model parameters and exports stay on the participant's device unless the participant intentionally exports these.

5.  User-controlled support. A cue is short, not blocking, has no probability, and is not indicative of the participant continuing intentionally.

6.  Auditable state. The following degrees of states are explicitly represented: Session, Checkpoint, Model, Cue, Response, and Suppression.

To define a browser and tangible components.

The browser component is a Chrome Manifest V3 extension that's coded in React and TypeScript. It has a background service worker that handles a single active task session, local storage, activity aggregation, pending reflections, checkpoint evaluation and exports. Content scripts are used to track clicks, scrolls and keyboard activity, but do not store the target or characters. The durations that are accumulated are 10-second intervals for Focus, idle, active, away, tab-switch and accessible video-playback.

The extension comes with onboarding, task-site configuration (the participant will approve), task-start popup, local dashboards, privacy and export view and an ESP32 controller page. The two aspects with which the interaction sequence can be most readily explained is seen in figure 2. Prior to data collection, the task declaration and intended duration is displayed in the popup. While the ESP32 is the actual physical interface, the device controller reflects the physical controls and the state of the LCD. The privacy boundary is detailed in its own right in Figure 4.

This ESP32 board features an active buzzer, 3 pull-up buttons and a 16x2 I2C character display. The duration and the countdown are displayed and kept as long as they are selected. The meanings of the buttons vary between a few different visible states: setup, selection, running and reflection. The buttons reset or add duration and start the task during the set-up. In a running session, the third button is for completion of the task and for reflection. In the reflect phase buttons 1, 2 and 3 mean record, move away and not sure, respectively. The device and extension send each other short line based commands over the USB serial connection; the browser is the source of truth for device session state and model state.

If the model score crosses the preset value line, it will beep two short tones every 10 seconds for up to 5 times. The buzzer is silenced when the device is returned to an approved task site, the task is completed, the reflection is entered, the stop button is pressed or the automatic limit is reached. An alert will be silenced after 15 seconds of no heartbeat, if there is a loss of connection, the device will be alerted after a 2 second heartbeat. These rules make the cue salient and time bound.

PRIVACY BOUNDARY

Privacy isn't just a policy statement, it's an architectural constraint. Figure 4 categorises stored data by purpose and compares that to data which is not stored. Approved hostnames are only sites that a participant planned for. Any activity outside of that set is reported as Away Time without Destination ID. It is numeric summaries and a structured task category that is fed into the model, not page semantics. Participants are able to review, export or remove the records locally.

METHODS

The study will take the form of a structured approach, with the primary sources cited being the evidence.

Sequential two phases design was used in the study. Phase 1 task-session records were collected in the absence of a model-assisted mid-session cue. Once data were merged, redundant and used for the model development, the tangible system was deployed in Phase 2 with model evaluation carried out on the duration of the deployment. The same task-alignment construct was used for the phases, and the evidence was used for different purposes. The Phase 1 efforts were used to develop the model and to perform the retrospective discrimination. Phase 2 interviews were used to aid in descriptive rate of the usability and perceived cue experience. The order of the phases was constant and hence any variation in preference and/or memory is not a random causal estimate.

The paper makes use of four evidence sources. The literature archive is included containing literature used to obtain the design requirements and research gap. Implementing behavior is defined by the extension, the firmware, the model artifacts and the automated tests. Combined Session file contains Activity and Alignment records of Phase 1. The interview workbook contains anonymous structured and open answers of 12 participants following Phase 2.

PHASE 1 DATA COLLECTION

19 participants installed extension and intentionally began browser sessions. Each start they chose a structured task type and planned time duration. The extension collected interaction and state measures and summed them up into 10-second windows throughout the task. It asked the participant for his or her alignment answer at the session boundary and saved questions that were not answered as pending reflections, instead of silently labelling them as such.

All the participant's exports were combined in the file: driftsense_merged.csv There are 665 sessions in the file, and 18 fields documented. The number of sessions participants contributed ranged from a minimum of 31 sessions to a maximum of 39 sessions (median = 35 sessions). Intended durations were 10, 15, 20, 30, 45, 60, or 90 minutes. Observed durations ranged from 1.6 to 120.0 minutes (median = 24.3; mean = 31.5). The most frequent activity was learning or tutorial sessions (199), followed by communication or coordination (129), reading or research (122), coding or problem solving (93), writing or creating (91) and other planned activities (31).

Of the 665 records, 634 had usable binary outcome (358 aligned and 276 drifted away, prevalence of drift being 43.5%). Thirty one outcome "not sure" or missing were excluded from binary model. Of the 20 rows identified by the consistency audit, 15 had the same numeric label as the explicit post-session answer and 5 did not. That label was explicitly given in the analysis and the source export has not been changed by the analysis. No duplicate session identifiers were found, no overlapping sessions in a participant and all 665 rows had exact active, idle and away session times.

It is important to select a suitable model and validate it.

The modeling pipeline included majority class, a prompt-all timer rule, intended duration, task site, task type, combined context, combined context and activity, combined context and activity and elapsed-time features, and participant calibrated context and activity. Activity features comprised of log transformed event counts and durations, event rates per minute, active shares, idle shares, away shares and video shares. Splits were done by participant identifier, but were not used as model inputs.

Preprocessing was a part of training data. The development set consisted of participant-relative days 1-7 of each of the 19 participants (441 sessions). Using participant-grouped 5-fold validation, the feature families and regularization values were tested five times for comparison. There were 18 participants with a chronological known-participant holdout of 193 later sessions. The selection rule was the best development ROC–AUC, if the models were within .01 then Brier score. A 35% positive-decision cap was applied to the development predictions and a decision threshold was put on these predictions and tested once on the chronological holdout.

The Phase 2 package deployed was a small logistic model with structured task type, intended duration, number of task-sites, elapsed vs. intended durations ratio, share of active, idle, and away time. It was serialised for matching inference on the browser side. The stored threshold was .7363. Retrospective holdout model results are based on activity proportions in completed sessions, but do not establish discrimination in the earlier rolling windows in Phase 2.

PHASE 2 ROLLING EVALUATION

Phase 2 adapted the model to an interaction based on the duration of the interaction. In those sessions with a planned length of up to and including 20 minutes there were checks every 5 minutes. For the longer sessions, every 10 minutes the sessions were checked. Each checkpoint assessed just the previous interval as shown in figure 5. For instance, minute 10 of a short session is really minutes 5–10 and minute 20 of a longer session is minutes 10–20. This pattern is continued throughout the implementation, for the set period of time; in the example above of a 50-minute session, checks are made at minute 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50.

At a checkpoint, if below the threshold, then no device cue was given. One alert episode was initiated due to a score at or above threshold. The cue never gave out a score, nor said the drift. The participant was free to retake the task, to persist on purpose or complete the task and then answer the post-session question. The deployment provided all cues which crossed the threshold score; there was no concurrent silent-control condition.

POST-STUDY INTERVIEWS

Twelve of the 14 subjects who went through both phases finished the interview workbook. Six were aged 18–24, five were 25–34, and one was 35–44. Six reported that their primary occupation was student, two that it was knowledge worker, two software professional and two both student and worker. Eleven recalled that they received Phase 2 check-in/beep, one did not. Thus, ratings specifically for the cue timing and experience were available for 11 participants and the general Phase 2 ratings and phase preference were available for all 12 participants.

The workbook includes ten Likert statements (on a five-point agreement scale) in Phase 2 and five in Phase 1. On positively worded items, ratings of either 4 or 5 were considered to be favorable. The rating of 1 or 2 was good for effort, interruption and annoyance. Valid n, median, interquartile range (IQR) and favourable count are reported instead of using the scale as a continuous measure. The open responses were clustered into useful effects, limitations and requested refinements. Given that there was no documentation of independent coders it is not possible to claim a full thematic analysis, but these groups summarise responses.

RESULTS

The datasets and models from PHASE 1 are compared.

The Phase 1 dataset was wide-spread both between the six task types and in terms of multiple observations per participant. It had 634 labeled sessions, 358 aligned outcomes and 276 moved away outcomes. The chronological holdout did not haphazardly combine early and late records of a participant, but instead kept later records from known participants. This will make this more difficult for the result than a random session split, but it will not be an unseen-participant test.

Modest performance was found on the chronological holdout with context-only baselines. The intended duration resulted in ROC–AUC .551, task site .576, task type .620 and combined task context .631. ROC–AUC was improved to .931 by using Activity-only logistic regression. ROC – AUC values of .932 – .936 were achieved when adding context, elapsed-time, or participant calibration. The distinctions between these more sophisticated models were slight and the importance of a succinct model was confirmed, and the limitations of claims for a single context variable were also highlighted.

The 193-session chronological holdout in the separately packaged Phase 2 model achieved ROC–AUC .938, accuracy .891, precision .959, recall .795 and F1 .870 at threshold .7363. There were 102 true negatives, 3 false positives, 18 false negatives and 70 true positives in the confusion matrix. 37.8% of sessions (73/193) exceeded the threshold. The baseline progression and operational scorecard is given in Fig. 6.

The completed-session results speak to RQ2 within the scope of the completed sessions. The low false positive at the frozen temperature is good for cue burden, but the 18 false negatives indicate that a conservative temperature may result in moved away sessions being missed. The key takeaway: proportions in a full-session can be different than what's displayed in a previous interval. The live schedule is in place and tested, but window level outcome audits are needed to measure the quality of early decision.

IMPLEMENTATION VERIFICATION

The automated verification involved the build of the extension, the probability agreement between the browser and Python, checkpoints on duration of policies, serial communication, export schema, handling of outcomes and the deletion of linked records. For the serialized full-session test vectors, the browser and Python probabilities matched, to floating point accuracy. Minutes 5, 10, 15, and 20 were checked for duration policy, three button events and the device states used for session control, reflection, and alerts were checked for serial policy.

Exports are still only for documented fields, exports are not translated to aligned labels if there is an uncertain outcome or action only, and page paths, query strings and key values are not exported; and local deletion deletes linked activity windows. These checks are used as for the RQ1 implemented system property, comfort of the participants is reported separately.

POST-STUDY INTERVIEW FINDINGS

100% of the 12 participants rated Phase 1 as easy to use, 100% rated the clarity of the session boundaries as good, 100% rated clarity of the outcome-questions as good, and 100% rated their comfort with the recorded information as good. The added effort was rated favorably low for eleven of 12. All 12 rated ease and all 12 rated privacy comfort favorably; and all 12 rated effort favorably low for Phase 2. Of the 11 participants who recalled the cue, 10 rated it favorably for timing, all 11 rated it favorably for moment of reconsideration, support for reflection and support for returning, 10 rated it favorably low for interruption of useful activity and all 11 rated it favorably low for annoyance. Eleven out of 12 preferred Phase 2 vs Phase 1.

The numbers of item medians were in line with the good counts. The median values for Phase 1 ease were 4.0, session clarity were 4.5, outcome-question clarity and privacy comfort were 5.0 and effort were 2.0. The median values for ease was 5.0, for privacy comfort, 5.0 and for effort, 2.0. For cue-specific items, the median score for timing was 4.0, and for useful reconsideration, reflection, and return, it was 5.0 each; and for interruption and annoyance, 2.0 each. The median for preference for Phase 2 was 5.0.

For the ratings, open responses provide clarity about their meaning to participants. Seven were clustered under goal reorientation and four were clustered under reflective awareness and one did not recall cue exposure. Participants reported pausing or comparing the present page with the stated task, closing irrelevant pages or continuing on purpose when there was a detour but it still supported the task. The physical cue was valued because it would still be prominent if the browser wasn't in the foreground, and several participants spoke up about it being a physical cue that would make people choose and not block the page.

The critical responses also were illuminating. Five described an occasional false cue, one described a cue as early and one said timing was useful, but not necessarily accurate. Four could not recall a definitely false cue and one could not recall exposure. Recommended enhancements were: volume control, temporary mute, more obvious connection/delivery feedback, longer task card visibility, confirmation when selecting to continue, and displaying the Context of the task being declared. These comments provide explanation as to why low annoyance does not necessarily indicate perfect timing.

DISCUSSION

From Website control to task-relative reflection

The key conceptual shift of DriftSense is to make the task, and not the website, the hub of digital-wellbeing support. It's important because mixed use environments cause domain labels to become brittle. The dataset showed the same approved hostname repeated for various types of activities and activities outside of the approved set might be background activity. Making the task initiation and subsequent alignment answer explicit renders the system legible, because the user can see at a glance what was declared, what was measured, and what finally provided the label.

This is backed by the baseline progression, but not semantics. Intended duration, task site and task type discriminated only marginally; and aggregate activity discriminated significantly between the two reported outcomes. Activity continued to be indicative, however. The model predicts whether a pattern is similar to sessions which were later reported as moved away, but not whether away time, idling and tab switching are similar to objective drift. This difference becomes very significant when a cue is given whilst a task is being carried out practically.

WHY A TANGIBLE CUE

The ESP32 interface materialises model timing. Drift can be obscured behind browser windows or tabs by prompts from the browser. A quick sound and a countdown that is shown, is noticeable without obscuring content. The physical controls also indicate the boundaries of the interaction explicitly: the start, the finish and the final reflection are actions and not interpreted boundaries.

This role is reflected in participants' reports. They regularly characterized the beep as short and helpful, and something that could be heard, for getting back to work, even if the browser wasn't in front. Volume control, mute and connection feedback requests are also evidence of the social and practical issues in a physical device. A sound that is appropriate for an individual's workspace may not work for a conference or shared space. The physical cue should remain in the next version, but there should be increased clarity in volume and confirmation.

Aim for the highest level of evidence.Try to use the strongest evidence.

The results of the model and interview cannot be substituted for each other. The chronological holdout is a measure of how different completed-session features are for later self-reports. It doesn't set accuracy at minute 5 or minute 10. The interviews give insight into the user's experience of the deployed system with 12 participants. They don't independently check each delivery time or that a cue led to a behavior change. Thus, the main thesis of the paper is that it is not only a causal decrease in drift, but also a pathway from the private sphere of sensing to the public sphere of reflection that has been implemented and evaluated.

This form of separation enhances the contribution. From the session data, one can see that there is beneficial retrospective signal in content-free sessions; from the deployed product, one can observe that decisions can elicit a time-limited physical interaction and from the interviews, one can see both acceptance and concrete refinements. These verified components can be used in a controlled study in the future without having to repeat the interviews.

Prior systems have been represented as a string of characters.

DriftSense maintains access and is aware of how context of browsing can influence perceived goal alignment, as with Purpose Mode. It is not part of the content interface, but rather assesses a task session initiated by participants and moves reflection to the outside of the page, where it is not part of Purpose Mode. One sec is like an interrupt, it creates a decision point using a small interrupt. It is a cue that is given during an unfolding task, not to start an application. It is similar to StayFocused, but, unlike StayFocused, it relies on content-free activity summaries, and a duration-based policy, not just an attempted exit or completion.

The design is also not like the tools to optimize screen-time reduction. For a long session, it can be declared as aligned and for a short session, it can be declared as drifted, based on the outcome of the session, as per the task the participant has declared. It can hence assist students in study, programming, research, communication, and leisure activities in an orderly fashion without diminishing the one in favour of the other. A limitation that it deliberately imposes is that a content-free sensing does not explain why a pattern happened, and self-report by the participant is still required.

LIMITATIONS

There are a number of limitations of the study. The first is because there are repeated sessions for 19 participants in the Phase 1 sample. The chronological holdout does not give any indication of generalization to unseen users, and relies on later records from known users. Second, the operational model was trained and tested ex post with regards to the proportions of completed sessions of the activities. The 5/10-minute schedule is in operation, but the checkpoint outcomes were not discriminated and calibrated separately from the early-window discriminations, nor was the false-cue burden of the 5/10-minute schedule separately estimated from checkpoint outcomes.

Third, 31 sessions did not have a viable binary outcome (and were therefore excluded). Twenty numeric labels were checked for the explicit answers. The rule was clearly defined and known, however there is potential for missingness and for response error. Fourth, the interview sample is small, retrospective and is exposed in a fixed order to the phases. May be novelty and recall effects that affect the favorable ratings as well as social-desirability effects. The workbook is not a substitute for delivery logs and one participant was not able to recall a cue.

Fifth, an audible cue may be unavailable, unnoticed or socially inappropriate. The prototype can beep for a short duration, although there are some suggestions from the participants about the need to have a configurable volume, silent modes and greater understanding of the connection state. Lastly, privacy minimization has the effect of limiting the knowledge of the model by design. As DriftSense doesn't include page text and outside-set destination identity it can't be used to determine semantic relevance. That restriction is also a part of its contribution: It requires human interpretation instead of silently growing surveillance.

CONCLUSIONS

DriftSense shows a full spectrum of participant stated browser activities and model timed tangible reflection. The completed-session discrimination for Phase 1 was good and the 665 sessions were obtained by 19 participants with explicit self-report maintained as the task-drift label. Phase 2 adapted that model into a series of five- or ten-minute decisions, and an ESP32 interface with a countdown display, a short beep and three physical controls. The 12 who completed the interviews found the usability to be high and their level of comfort with privacy to be high; the 11 who recalled the cue generally found it helpful and not very intrusive, but noted that there were occasional false or mistimed cues.

The result is not a web site classifier nor a productivity score. It links and relates structured task context, content-free sensing, explicit outcome measurement, local prediction and a point of reflection in the physical world. We will not be able to expand or intrusive sensing, but controlled window-level prediction and behavior study is its next step.

THEORY, APPLICATION, OR POLICY IMPLICATIONS

DriftSense advocates for a system which is grounded in digital well-being to take the form of a relationship between a stated task, a developing activity pattern and a subsequent human decision. Theoretically, this distinguishes between the behavioral evidence and the meaning and prevents the assumption that the longer a behavior is present, the more harmful it is. The findings suggest that using sparse, optional cues, the locations of the tasks in the system approved by the participants, the explicit boundaries of the sessions, and hardware controls which are visible outside the browser window are preferable for application. Sound or feedback for delivery should be configurable, not an optional 'polish'. Data minimisation should be defined on a field-by-field basis; data can be collected on a field-by-field basis and if data is collected on systems, then data can be minimised, e.g. timing and aggregate activity are necessary for research governance, but page content, destination history, and key values are not. Completed-session accuracy, a window accuracy (early), delivery reliability, and intervention effects should be reported separately to prevent the misconception of a completed cue as causal evidence.

ETHICS STATEMENT

In the session and interview results anonymous identification of the participants and consent procedure as described in the study materials is used. Names of participants, messages, page content, source code, search query or destination site out of the set of participant-approved task-sites is not reported. All participation was voluntary and the system allowed for local inspection, export and deletion of records.

DATA AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY

The extension source, schemas, tests, analysis code, model documentation and the aggregate results are all packaged with the project. Sharing participant-level exports and interview records should only be done if there is consent, institutional approval and disclosure-risk review. Exclusion and reconciliation rules, model versions, and reproducible commands should be provided in any released aggregate or de-identified evidence.